this video is 100  inspired by my fellow youtuber and  contemporary j.j mccullough  it has become known on the internet that  he and i talk every so often i i  wouldn't call him a close personal  friend we're on a first name basis  but we're not on a middle name basis i  don't know his middle name  nor does he mind but yeah he and i have  talked from time to time and i think it  is completely inevitable that he is  somewhat politically fascinated by me  because i am simultaneously more  left-wing and more right-wing than he is  and i think that fascination is mutual  in any case uh gg mccullough just made a  video  reflecting in a personal way on what was  going on in his life in september 11  2001 how he first learned about the  terrorist attacks uh september 11 2001  what it meant in his own life and you  know to some extent for for planet earth  from that perspective now i am  significantly older uh than jj  mccullough  only okay all right  i often don't feel that i'm any older  than him uh but you know i'm now all 42  years old and my member of september  11th it's different for many reasons now  this is something i think nobody in my  audience appreciates  but when september 11 2001 happened i  was in a uniquely privileged position of  having just finished about two years of  study of the politics of the muslim  world of the politics of the middle east  broadly speaking  um  that does not make me an expert by any  stretch the imagination  but compared to the average white  english-speaking canadian i was in the  tiny minority of people who really knew  the names of and knew the intellectual  history of  the leading terrorists of that period of  time i knew the different factions those  terrorists were divided up into and what  had been happening in say the 20 or 30  years leading up to september 11 2001. i  had read the quran  in english i had read the hadith  in english i had read the history of  what's called islamic jurisprudence i  had really read and thought about and  written essays about written exams about  the relationship between religion and  politics in the muslim world and i'd  spent a long time talking personally to  the one unique professor and we did have  something of a personal relationship you  can still look him up on the internet  today first name rameen last name jahan  beglew now  say this but my relationship with him  you know  he had talked to me about his divorce  that he was very broken at that time but  he was not at peace with it he was not  detected detectively talking about his  personal life he talked to me about the  political struggles within  uh the university department to define  his life  he never really spoke to me about his  political relationship with iran  but i got to see demonstrated right in  front of my eyes just how visceral  for him  his position was within the islamic  political world i got to see how he was  when he was facing off with people who  were  more secular than he was  and with people who were more muslim  than he was people who were more  westernizing than he was people who  embraced basically assimilating into  west culture and people who were opposed  to that people who you know wanted them  to take their own path  and  you know  i first  unconsciously and then quite consciously  and cerebrally considered the  possibility of devoting my life to the  study of muslim politics and to be a  kind of lobbyist if you like for the  future of islam within canada and  to affect the politics of the muslim  world now i say that intentionally that  it was  say that quite precisely that it was  first an option  i was considering without really being  aware that i was considering it  and then it started to become something  i thought about cerebrally intentionally  now as soon as i was really thinking  about it intentionally  i rejected the option it became observed  um  [Music]  the difference i could make being  involved in the politics of the muslim  world again whether you think of that as  the middle east or indonesia i mean the  muslim world is this huge strangely  shaped part of the world includes the  philippines it includes north africa you  know um but to get involved in  politics of that kind  rather than the politics of canada's own  indigenous people for example there's no  comparison i would have preferred to  devote my life and my time my energy and  even my my linguistic study my study of  languages to the cree the ojibwe the  inuit you name it any any of the  indigenous groups you have in canada and  in that theater  every intellectual really mattered  everyone made a big difference just one  more you know brilliant mind devotes  their life to learning the inuit  language and being involved in inuit  politics it's one of our native  peoples that really matters to them it  really really matters to you as the  person doing the work and it's really  going to matter to the future of  politics in canada if you think about  your future as uh as politics in canada  now hashtag spoilers the ultimate  conclusion i came to  with a great deal of agony and agonizing  was that i had to get the hell out of  canada that i had to leave canada behind  forever and in many ways i did  but at that stage of my life when  september 11 2001 came around the main  thing i have to emphasize to you is i  was in this tiny minority of people  after about two years of study with  professor rameen jahan beglu who was  basically the only guy at the university  of toronto at that time who really cared  about the politics of the muslim world  and he was really kind of rebelling  against the other professors in the  department political science and that he  was really seriously trying to engage  students in the study of and discussion  of  the politics of the muslim world  and um you know sorry it'd be so easy  for me to tell this story while you know  deleting my own subjective misery from  it it was a tremendously bleak  tremendously sorrowful uh time in my  life  and for that professor it was a  tremendously bleak and sorrowful time in  his life also why did he latch on to me  why did he spend so much time with me  one-on-one like i said we became friends  to some extent there were no other  intellectuals in the university i was  you know i was this teenage kid i was a  normal aged undergraduate student but he  said to me openly he said look you know  the other professors here they don't  care about politics they don't care  about history he would always say they  don't care about the history of ideas  that was his way of talking that was his  idea you know i don't i don't use that  term you know but he he clung to me as a  fellow intellectual  and um i was emotionally very broken up  very broken down at that time um it was  it was a tremendously dark uh period of  my life  and by the way sorry i mean  my engagement with the politics and  history and philosophy of the muslim  world  um  you know that was a kind of uplifting  diversion and i could see right away how  many white men  if they had a weaker ego than i did  could get  dragged into it  uh  as soon as i started showing up at these  are kind of academic conferences  on muslim politics and muslim philosophy  what was going on  and this is before september 11th but  not long before like a couple months  before september 11 2001. there were  there were almost no white people there  like  i i you know  almost everyone would be an immigrant  from somewhere in the muslim world you  know  and boy a lot of good-looking women were  were interested in me at those guys oh  yeah i mean in case you think it's only  guys who study uh cambodia or vietnam or  japan who get laid  right away there are a lot of women and  what they're looking for  is a guy who's just  nominally muslim someone who is just  muslim enough to satisfy their parents  but it was a completely liberated modern  intellectual in every other way now  obviously i'm not saying this is the  majority of muslim women on planet earth  i'm saying if you are on a university  campus if you are in this kind of  intellectual setting  there are a lot of gorgeous women from  the muslim world including iran and  you name it i mean what's  all shapes and sizes and they are really  looking for a guy who fits my  approximate description and they are  assuming partly just based on the  physionomy of my face they are assuming  that i am someone who will satisfy that  requirement of being just muslim enough  to shut up their parents and  grandparents if they if they get married  to me so yeah and also  um  i could see a lot of people would get  hooked into it and dragged into it  because of the sense of danger because  of the stakes so there was one of these  events i went to i'm certain i went  because this one professor invited me he  wanted me to be there and i i could see  again how emotionally difficult this  event was for him i won't kind of tell  his story uh what went on but it was  pretty typical formatting that there was  this  lecture in a in a theater  and then we we broke off into a room for  discussion and i was among the elite  people who got to just hobbed on with  people first this and there were people  there again i don't i don't know if  there was one white person there  um but there were people there from  across the muslim world one of the guys  i talked to was from north africa so  you're talking to african muslims as  well as muslims from iran or or what  have you you know  and you know if you've been trapped in  the intellectual sub-basement of  canadian politics where nobody is a real  intellectual and nobody is committed to  any kind of outcomes and nobody has any  sense of self-sacrifice nobody has any  revolutionary order about anything  you're you're you're used to the  sub-basement of you know canadian  political mediocrity you know  and then you step into this political  theater  where all of a sudden there are really  high stakes it's really life and death  people are really killing one another  and people are really raising money for  all kinds of different causes and there  were people attached to the cia and  there were people attached to things  scarier than the cia all over the world  and they're right there my dude i've  done this before september 2001. after  september 11th i don't know if some of  this stuff became more covert or less  but like  there are people whether or not they can  really make a difference they are  debating the future of syria and the  future of iran and the future of any  number of places in africa and they are  debating what they personally are going  to do about it and how they're going to  raise money from donors there are real  stakes and even just the fact that  you could publish a book stating your  opinion  and people would try to kill you  if you're used to  the dead-end doldrums of canadian  politics let me tell you let me tell you  that's like washing your mouth out with  listerine  oh now i'm enough now i'm in a theater  people are getting killed for what they  believe in people are people are making  decisions that have consequences  politics has stakes again and this was  before  september 11 2001. so i felt that and i  understood that and you know i i was  ignorant i was very young man of course  i was ignorant but i was brilliant and  everyone picked up on the fact that i  was a brilliant woman even the questions  i asked from the audience at these  events you know what i mean people were  like oh  who's this guy this guy knows what's up  you know what i mean and again i've done  the reading man you know i read some  history of the muslim world and i read  the quran and hadith and i had some say  you know  not remotely an expert but compared to  any white person born and raised in  canada was this tiny minority people  who knew what was going on  you know what i mean  but i had the  self-discipline  and  i was self-critical enough you know  to to look down that hallway and see  where that leads and i understood the  ego trip i understood the appeal of it  and to close  the book cover to close that door and be  like  no  [Laughter]  and  so the day september 11  2001 came around um  you know when you're young one year  feels like a long time six months feels  good you know all that stuff felt old to  me that was old news i already knew  about politics in the muslim world i  already knew about the history of  terrorism and you know just to give an  example i knew all about  the difference between sunni islam and  shia islam and the wars between them and  how u.s foreign policy had been involved  and how british foreign policy and  french foreign policy had been involved  with the sykes pico line and uh issues  concerning syria and iran that's still  going on this day like in this big  picture way you know i i knew what was  up but it felt old to me none of that  was new  and it was something i had already  decided against for my own future  i was not going to learn arabic i was  not going to go into politics of that of  that kind that was a decision i had  i had already made  but i knew  the madness  and the danger  and the  that that  indescribably appealing  sense that the decisions you make will  have consequences for generations to  come if i knew  i knew that that world the politics of  the islamic world that that was that  high-stakes game that every other  avenue  within the halls of the university sorry  to mix metaphors but every other avenue  that the university presented me they la  it lacked that high stakes quality you  know  at that time then as now i loved the the  philosophy  of uh  of ancient rome of ancient greece uh  really athens more than rome to be  honest but you know sure aristotle  fascinating thucydides fascinating you  know herodotus whatever  all kinds of stuff for you know but i  mean  if you choose to devote your life to the  study of  ancient grace and ancient rome where are  the stakes where is the danger where is  the consequence where is the risk  and and how can you change the world  through that kind of to that kind of  study you know now of course you know  if i were talking to a younger person  they were asking i do have answers like  you can you can change the world uh by  learning ancient greek or latin and  where you can't you can  but  wow when you stepped into that  that world of of politics of politics of  the muslim world  and right up to september 11 2001  everyone was ignoring it like everyone  was ignoring except me and my one  professor ramin shan i don't think he  had a single other student okay i don't  think it is single other student who  wasn't born muslim who was interested  and of course most of the students who  were born muslim they also weren't  terrorists but there were a few muslim  students a born and raised muslim who  had some  some level of uh  of interest  so  i had just flown  to  washington dc and back alone  so as mentioned i'm a very young man in  uh september 11 2001. i had just been in  washington dc i wish i could say i flew  back on september 10th  but from memory i think it was actually  september 9th i flew back it's possible  it was september 10th but it was it was  just before so i believe the flight was  on the ninth but then you know i don't  know i think i was just kind of really  tired for a day because of when the  flight you know that is kind of lose a  day in and out of airports so it felt  like it was the very next day that's  but i believe i flew on the ninth  and then and then the eleventh happened  and um  you know i was shaving  and my father was so it's also very  unusual that i traveled alone it's not  worth getting into what but you know i  had just been in washington dc and i had  visited the pentagon i went and visited  the pentagon oh yeah i had been standing  right there looking at the pentagon and  when i when i first got back you know my  parents said oh what did you think of dc  and i said  the only building in that entire city  that has architecture with any sense of  good taste to distinguish it is the  pentagon i said that is a town full of  unspeakably awful tasteless architecture  and the only exception the only building  i can praise is the pentagon that's a  that's a world that's a good-looking  building you know so yeah yeah  yeah if you know sorry if you know  something about architecture and if  you've traveled in europe or asia i'm  sorry but you know i'm sorry but the the  congress building is  unspeakably ugly poorly made building  but the pentagon that that really held  up you know  i mean just so i just been there i just  seen washington dc in person i just seen  the pentagon in person it felt to me  like i just woken up from the airplane  but actually i don't know if 12 hours or  14 hours or 24 some some number of hours  had passed um since i'd gotten off the  airplane  and uh  i was shaving there in front of the  shaving mirror and my father came in and  he said to me  a plane crashed into you know the world  trade center building in uh  in new york city  and i laughed and my first reaction was  to say  i told them i told them not to put a  tower there you remember we were talking  about this 20 years  i just started doing this bit with him i  just started like acting out this comedy  scene as if i were this old man who at  the time that the tower was being  constructed i had said it's only a  matter of time if you put a tower there  before a flight you know an airplane  goes into it at that moment i had no  idea it was a terrorist act like that  the first plane hit you know the  assumption was this was just an error  that this was an accident that this was  you know a flight path there or a  technical error or computer or that  something had had caused this as an  accident and i stood there you know  laughing at the absurdity of you know  an aircraft collision right in the  middle of of new york city i mean it is  absurd but if in that moment you think  it is human incompetence or an urban  planning error or something of the kind  you know that that might be how you  react to it anyway so again my father is  now deceased this is a relatively happy  memory and uh i did it's a long time ago  now i did have a formal education in  comedy doing comedy and i may now get  back to it my old age i may now return  to doing stand-up comedy or something  but i'd done sketch comedy instead of  comedy a little bit and stuff i had  written comedy so i really responded at  that moment as an opportunity to to to  have a laugh at the absurdity of it all  um  now within 20 or 30 minutes of that i  think  the theory was starting to become  prevalent on the tv news that this was  not an accident that this was not uh you  know this was not merely due to a  computer error or you know  some kind of navigation error or  planning error this wasn't due to  incompetence of air traffic control or  something but that they said this had  been done intentionally and then um  so again anyone can look up now how many  minutes passed between one airplane  striking one building and another  striking another straight striking the  second building but um  i walked  from  my home  to the university campus i kind of had a  series of of errands to do  and my parents had asked me to buy them  something as i recall  uh something very particular you had to  get from a health food store like it  might have been psyllium husk some one  of these funny funny food additives or  or what have you and i remember as i was  walking down the street  you could tell  who had heard the news  and who had not no matter which age  group the people were of the people you  saw on the street so again i'm going  through normal streets in toronto and  then into the university university of  toronto is very much integrated into the  city so there are normal pedestrians  there too not everyone's university but  whether you're talking about someone 60  years old 50 years old or like teenagers  attached to university the people who  knew the way they were looking down at  the ground the way they were talking to  one another they were so down cast and  you know this sense of  this sense of suddenly being made small  by the enormity of political events in  the world was it was evident even in the  hunching of their shoulders right but  then as you went you know i remember  there were two people i passed and two  people there's more than two but there's  two in particular i remember and they  were talking in this upbeat way about  their love lives about who was dating  who or you know how how kevin and stacey  were doing together or something like  this and you could just tell your past  and like  they don't know yet  i mean they they left the house and had  to walk in the park or something they  before this happened because it had just  happened this was during the time when  the first planet hit and the second  plane hadn't hit yet i finished shaving  and went out the door um so it was  during these moments probably that the  that the second plane went into the  second tower  um  [Music]  and  at that time so i really dislike this  element of canadian culture flat screen  tvs were still very expensive  and there was this horrible building in  the middle of uh of university toronto  campus and they tried to make it less  horrible by adding huge  tv screens playing the news at all times  just as i recall just a few days before  maybe it was a few months before but not  very long before it's number 11 they'd  added these horrible uh giant screens  and i remember thinking  talk about bad architecture you know  you've taken this awful  interior space and you've made it worse  by adding noise pollution and you know  air pollution  and i think there has been never there's  never been another day in the history of  the university where people were sitting  on the floor watching the tv you know in  the middle of that  there were no benches there was a  sterile concrete windowless hall  people were so blown over and you saw i  mean again  i was just walking past this there were  people who were kind of happy and  walking you know enjoying their day and  they came in the doors  and they'd oh what why are people  sitting on the floor what what's in the  oh  oh  and then you know they also might sit on  the floor they might lean against  what  you saw people at each stage  of  recognition  and uh  i hope i hope none of these people now  get on and make a youtube video  about me  but you know i so i had to do a number  of things on the campus and then i went  up to this health food store  and  i was smiling i'll tell you just the  moment while i was as as i was observing  all this i was really smiling and when i  got to the health food store i said to  them they were they were really schlumpy  hippies there were stereotypical hippies  two white people who looked and dressed  like a stereotypical happy working in  this healthy store and i forget i was  buying psyllium husk or whatever i was  buying i had to get some get some things  and uh  you know i said tell me you know have  you have you heard the news  and they were sitting there slumped over  and their situation was they had  actually been listening to the radio  continuously and when i came in they  turned it down like i guess they're you  know when customers come in they turn  the down radio down you know  and uh i see you know you hear that an  airplane went down and they said yeah  we've been sitting listening to the  radio continuously you know uh a second  plane just went into the the second  tower so i heard about that what was  what was out of the oh that was this way  you know so  why was i smiling i was smiling the  whole way  the whole walk  um  you know it was not certain at that  moment that it was terrorism  once the second plane hit then obviously  people started really committing to the  assumption that this was a terrorist  attack you know  um  you know it wasn't it wasn't clear yet  that it was terrorism and then it wasn't  clear that it was muslim terrorism it  could have been some other kind of  terrorist some other kind of attack but  i i felt and i knew  that now the whole world was going to be  dragged  out of the doldrums of this  self-centered self-indulgent myopic  world of politics that we had been in  since the end of the soviet union you  know that this this period  of uh  period of fundamental intellectual  laziness was coming to an end  that we were going to be returned  whether we liked it or not to a world  where you know political decisions  really mattered  uh i was like oh that's it we've been  you know we've been dreaming ever since  the fall of the berlin wall or ever  since the end of the hostility and  threat of nuclear war from the soviet  union you know we've been floating on  this cloud above the world  um  and now now someone has reached up to  grab that cloud and pull it back down to  earth and say no  you know the wicked ways of the world  are not done with you yet  and all of the things that were being  discussed on the news at that time so i  i still feel this way when i listen to  the radio or television talking about  chinese politics all the time it's like  nobody can pronounce the name of xi  jinping you know like the leader of  china they can't pronounce the name of  the cities in china they obviously know  nothing about but at that time  all of the things they were struggling  to pronounce and struggling to explain  from the muslim world from muslim i knew  those words i didn't speak arabic but  you know what it is when you do  university level study you learn key  terms you learn the names of places and  historically significant figures  political leaders and again i understood  already the distinction between  sunni and shiite and all this stuff you  know  um  so i was in this position where i was  hearing the radio announcers  struggling to articulate unfamiliar  words and concepts and i already had a  real depth of knowledge and familiarity  with them and again i felt that you know  i remember talking to that same  professor about it talking to professor  john beglew about it and i was like oh  well you used to be the representative  of the most unpopular and most marginal  area of study here at the university and  all of a sudden you're on center stage  all of a sudden everyone admits this is  the most most important most  consequential most high risk area of  study in politics  um  but i'd already made my decision  and  the biggest difference between the man i  am today and the man i was back then is  of course if if i had had the attitudes  and knowledge that i have today back in  201 i would have joined the army  period no hesitation none the only  question would have been which army did  i want to join would i join the american  army would it join the french army like  the french foreign legion i would have  just sat down like well  you know what what am i signing up  100  uh today you know the man i am today and  maybe even the man i was 10 years ago  you know uh would have been 100 down for  that for that action and who i was in  september 11th  uh  2001 who i was at that time it did not  occur to me  to join the army it's not that i was  tempted and decided against it  absolutely did not enter my mind that  this was a war i could fight it didn't  occur to me i could  join the american army i didn't even  know that was possible  for a canadian citizen i didn't know it  was possible for me to join the  franchise nobody had ever talked about  that and you know the canadian army it  is what it is if you want action you got  to join one of the armies that's really  going to go into uh hard fighting  whether that's in uh you know  afghanistan or or otherwise and at that  moment that day we didn't know where the  war was going to be you know what was it  you know some people were already saying  it's going to be afghanistan because  that was one of the places associated  with osama bin laden but you know it's  not as if the hijackers were actually  from afghanistan it wasn't it wasn't as  if america had been invaded by  afghanistan like you know who exactly  america would go to war against and who  would be their allies it was  on that day  um that was all a matter of of sheer you  know sheer speculation but you know  uh it was it was a very very dark time  in my life i mean the whole year 2001  2002 thereabouts you know  i felt that my place in the world was to  be an intellectual  um  you know i felt that  you know my place in the world was to  offer a certain kind of commentary uh  was to be a certain kind of creative  artist  um maybe to some extent to be a kind of  historian  a kind of uh you know political and  economic analyst  it absolutely did not occur to me  that being an intellectual was  compatible with  uh going through the training to enter  the us marine corps absolutely did not  it did not occur to me that  being an intellectual was compatible  with joining the french foreign legion  or what have you i figured that out too  late um i figured out  that the type of compromise you have to  make right here at the university of  victoria the kind of toadying you have  to engage in the kind of self-abnegation  you have to engage in just to be in a  normal master's degree program phd  program just to get along even at the  undergraduate level in a third-rate  canadian university that  is what's incompatible with being an  intellectual that actually it's the  traditional academic path that i would  never be able to compromise with that i  would have been much better off uh  joining the army so for me september 11  2001 mark this this very interesting  uh turning point in my life  because i was i was coming to the point  of deciding um you know not in terms of  earning money but in terms of what was  really going to be the meaning of my  life what was i going to do  um  as an intellectual and what what kind of  politics was it going to trade in  there seemed to me at that time to only  be two paths open in front of me  uh and by the way so i've got to say  this is related to veganism and  vegetarianism  the other path i had been on was ecology  and that included directly lobbying city  hall on ecology real ecology not  complaining to people about recycling  plastic containers you know what i mean  so i'd also really looked at thought  about ecological politics as my my path  forward  and  you know  having  concluded that no in canada there was  that was a path to nowhere you know  the two paths that remained open to me  were either i was going to commit to  buddhist politics and specifically the  buddhist politics of disaster areas like  cambodia  cambodia was not the only option but  cambodia is the easy one for me to say  cambodia was obviously a post-war barely  even post-war  but a war-torn poverty-stricken  bomb crater-filled disaster area so when  i say buddhist politics again you can  see there's the same sense of the high  stakes  of politics in the muslim world politics  the developing world politics of poverty  war consequences you know okay either  it's going to be that path or it's going  to be first nations politics politics of  the creed the ojibwe the mohawk the den  inuit you know you name it those were  really the only two paths i felt uh were  open to me and were worth pursuing that  were that were fit for uh  you know that were fit for a human being  uh given my given my services at that  time it absolutely did not occur to me  to become a lawyer for example i i  rejected that i did consider and i did  go to the training sessions i did  consider becoming a police officer  i've mentioned that before that actually  went to some of the training days and  talked to the police about what it would  take to be a police officer but i only  thought of that as a temporary expedient  that it might be a cop for for one or  two years  uh you know and then move on to cambodia  or what have you i did consider you guys  probably know about this i tried to go  into becoming a pharmacist and a few  other jobs like that  but you see i could imagine i could  imagine being a pharmacist  and being an intellectual trying to make  the world a better place this this path  of having a meaningful life that those  seemed  compatible to me and it absolutely did  not occur to me that i could join the  army and i could be a part of this  history directly and that i could still  be an intellectual i'd never met anyone  who thought that way or who had that  that kind of experience  um  you know  i was smiling and laughing  all  day  and everyone else around me was  terrified  my own mother was terrified my own  father was terrified like not the tv  broadcasters they were more professional  the voices on the radio you could hear  they were terrified and there were there  were the most pitiful call-in shows i'll  never forget the voice of some redneck  some guy who called in and saying uh i  don't understand why these people want  to kill us wasn't it just a short time  ago i saw on the news we were we were  giving them blankets and things  when they had an earthquake  like people were calling in in this  bereaved  stunned state everyone around me was  terrified because they were suddenly  dealing with a political landscape that  was totally unfamiliar to them  and for me even though i just had about  two years of education two years a long  time when you're young when you're young  it's a big percentage of your whole life  i had about two years of experience with  politics of the the muslim world  to me it was a landscape i was totally  familiar with i was totally comfortable  with what i had been uncomfortable with  was the extent to which the american  empire was sleepwalking through these  issues the extent to which people had  remained totally ignorant of the real  consequences of and the real stakes of  what what america had been doing in iraq  in iran um in the greater israel the  region what israel and its neighbors  however you want to put that area you  know that actually america had been  making tremendously high-stakes  decisions in a way that had absolutely  no democratic transparency and  accountability and where the the  journalists were not anyway interested  so on and so forth  i already knew who osama bin laden was  for most people i mean j.j mccullough  just said j.j mccullough in his video he  refers to some of the latin as a shadowy  and unknown figure at that not to me  right i knew who that was i already knew  the history of that dude and his  terrorist movement and how it connects  to saudi arabia and how it connects to  yemen and you know i already i was  already familiar with that  so  uh you know i mean  that's such a strange moment in life  there will never be a moment in my life  where what i know about myanmar  suddenly matters to my mother and my  father and all the kind of  mediocre minds around me who are  otherwise indifferent to politics you  know like oh well i've put in this time  and effort studying the politics of  myanmar and it's never going to matter  to you it's never going to be real to  you in the way it's real to me you know  you're never gonna weep over the  politics of myanmar in the way that i do  and that's awful that's what i said in  the video recently you know  i see my role as a as an intellectual as  being like an elvis impersonator living  in a country where nobody else knows who  elvis is well this this gives you a bit  of a deeper sense of it you know what  what cambodia means to me and what i  know  about the history and including the  current politics company it's never  going to matter to anyone else they're  never going to care about it the way i  do what i know about a place like laos  you know there are all these things well  i had been studying what seemed like  you know the most remote and obscure  thing in politics at that time people  had not heard of yemen people really at  that time most people did not know  afghanistan they did not they couldn't  find it on a map or they really had  never heard of it if you know obviously  economically it was a place of no  significance you know i i know some of  you watching this may say oh come on  that's that's nonsense because there had  been this war in afghanistan the 1970s  and like you can we you know that now  but i'm just saying you know back in  back in 2001  most people that they regarded this as  the most trivial the most obscure  nobody knew nobody cared and there and  there was no internet i mean between  1997 and 2001 you had the first  blossoming of the internet but most most  people  if if they wanted to know about  afghanistan they would have to walk to  their library and take an encyclopedia  off the bookshelf and leave through and  look it up and what they would find in  that encyclopedia wouldn't be worth  knowing it wouldn't tell you any of  these you know shocking disturbing  political religious and cultural facts  that are that are what really mattered  what people really needed to learn you  know in uh  in in 2001. so  you know  myanmar is never going to matter to you  and you and you and the people around me  in the way it matters to me the politics  of thailand  you guys if you've been with my channel  for a long time you've seen me really  getting very emotionally moved about  that where i say look to all you people  this is just a place where you go on  vacation you talk about thailand and you  talk about swimming and weight loss but  i'm talking about a military  dictatorship that destroyed democracy  like i'm talking about the politics that  have unfolded over the last several  years and i really care i really care  about the body count i really care about  the people who got shot dead in the  street and the cops showed up with a  [ __ ]  hose and hosed it down and got rid of  the blood you know the extent to which  you know the state itself is implicated  and involved in uh murder you know  within town that this to me this is real  politics this really matters and it's  never going to matter to you  not even if you've been on vacation in  thailand five times and you're making a  youtube video talking about you're going  back to thailand for the sixth time and  you're looking forward to swimming and  riding your bicycle and losing weight  like there's nothing i can do to make  the politics of myanmar the politics of  thailand the politics of cambodia matter  to you uh the way they matter to me and  september 11 2001 i was grinning ear to  ear i was smiling and laughing the whole  day because it seemed like suddenly for  just one day  all the people who live these lives  uh sleepwalking you know who really live  a life that has more in common with a  dream than it was with reality for just  one day they woke up and they lived in  the same world that i do a world of  massacres a world of unspeakable  political violence that is going on at  all times whether we call it peace or  war a world in which each of us makes  moral decisions that have real  consequences even if the decision you're  making is just to sit on your ass and  play video games instead of getting up  and trying to change something on planet  earth all right all the evils that  unfold in this planet whether we call  them religious whether we call them  cultural or whether we call them  political all those evils are made  possible not just by the actions not  just by the decisions of a small number  of evil men but the decisions made by  millions of us to indulge our own  selfish  term fatuous indifference it's our  decision to sit by and do  nothing  and in the last 20 years i've gotten to  see  how september 11 2001 briefly sounded an  alarm rang a bell that roused the whole  world that woke everybody up  and then  slowly  gradually  everyone got in their pajamas  and went back to sleep